today we're mixing pop vocals in Ableton
and the finished results sound like
this everybody want a baby they can try
but they never going to they me
like keep watching watch
it everybody want a baby they can try
but they never going to Su they follow
me
[Music]
like I'm Reed Stefon real puppet in the
game and today I'm showing you how to
mix a pop vocal in Ableton from start to
finish I'm breaking down every step of
the way from levels compression EQ
Reverb delay special effects our final
Master chain and so much more this
tutorial is going to be using some stock
plugins from Ableton but mostly my
favorite third party plugins that I
would be using in any do like autotune
Fab filter and special effects from even
Tides Anthology bundle which we'll get
to later but now let's jump into our
Ableton session
the song I have open is a track that I
produced titled repeat for easy McCoy
and Cara and this one includes both male
and female vocals but all the tips and
techniques that I'm going to show you
are transferable across any genre or
gender of singing that you might be
mixing so let's start at the very
beginning and take a listen to where a
mix is at as a starting
[Music]
point who you want to
be you can see all of Cara's vocals in
pink yourself now yeah some more up here
in teal and then easys are in
[Music]
blue gigantic like the Atlantic sound
the alarm but don't panic shoot it over
their head they never understand you
don't run the on another plan in all
these vocals were recorded with a Sony
c800g going into a vintech x73 preamp
with a low cut engaged around 50 HZ then
an 1176 compressor going straight into
my Titan interface let's Sol all of our
[Music]
vocals the only other thing I went ahead
and did was a little bit of volume
reduction and Ableton makes that really
easy when you have all your track
selected you could push them up or push
them down and I pulled everything down
to about minus5 on the leads and then
the doubles and everything were two or
three or more below that and if your
waveforms are coming in a little bit
thin or small looking I would definitely
double click on your Clips or highlight
them all and double click and push up
your gains so that they don't clip but
they're also not small waveforms there's
no magic number but you definitely don't
want to have to squint to see them and
you also don't want to have to use
plugins to make them loud we're going to
adjust our levels more as we mix but the
next important thing I like to set up
before I start mixing is panning you can
really take a mix from 20% to almost 50%
just by adjusting the panning let me
show you what I mean panning is all
about centered left or right and right
now everything is centered and that
means that there's a big traffic jam in
that Middle Lane and you can really hear
it here in the course when everything's
in let's just Loop this
hook and let start by painting our
doubles all the way to the right and all
the way to the left
not all the way but most the
way and then we have another set of
harmonies here let's do even
less to create a Wide Stereo spectrum of
all of these mono vocal recordings one
of the main advantages of stacking your
vocal is not only getting the group to
sound bigger but getting the group to
sound wider in the stereo field and if
you're not starting out your mix with at
least panning and leveling you're really
going to be fighting an uphill battle
for the rest of the job let's use some
of these same Panic techniques up here
on our rap vocals here in blue we have
Easy's lead followed by some doubles
front door easy at the back door let's
put our doubles all the way to the sides
myt like analog real wavy with the shars
let's hear it with the beat I'm the
spark when it's
I'm the veins to the you s duck in my
aim cuz ultimately listening to things
soloed is fun and nice to hear the
details but ultimately what matters is
how it sits with the beat when I panned
them all the way they sounded better but
they got a little bit loud so I'm going
to pull them down just about two more
DB easy
[Music]
at let's try less
Panic an I like half panning more than
full panning I'm the spark when it's
dark I'm the ve to the heart you a sting
duck in my aim and
shot everybody
[Music]
that's we have some more background
vocals down here let's try full painting
and half painting I bought a profit my
game strong Birds always
singing I don't want to talk even get
along watch me en and TR to cop stop
me that's ni
high so we're already sounding way more
like an actual mix and we've just done
some small volume and panning
adjustments and that goes to show how
much of a good mix goes into just the
balance of everything and making it
leveled appropriately with the music the
only plugins that we have going so far
on this entire vocal are some autotune
on the leads for years now I've been
using the uad in inari's discontinued
old school autotune realtime version and
it sounds like this yeah body want to be
me they can try but they're never going
to succeed they going follow me like one
two three keep watching I like the r
speed around 25 for this
song and I always keep the tracking
around 25
too watch it watch it since this song
kind of uses a custom variation of the
minor scale I've let a few notes in and
copied it around to any other instances
of singing so I'll probably paste this
here here here they going follow me like
1 2 sounds like I need to let a note in
here on these
harmonies let's try letting in the
F so sometimes certain harmonies hit
notes that are not in the scale and you
have to customize the autotune directly
to those channels but a lot of times you
could just use the default minor scale
or major scale and it'll work great so
essentially you want autotune on any
channels that have singing But if it's
ad libs and more verbal stuff like this
no need for
[Music]
autotune but channels like this where
it's singing we're definitely going to
want to past some autot
tune the next thing I like to do now
that I've applied all the autot tunes on
the individual singing channels is take
things and group them together even
though we have about 20 layers of vocals
we don't need to have 20 copies of vocal
chains running at the same time there's
a lot of things that we could group and
process process together like for
example I'm going to take the entire AC
capella by holding shift hitting command
G I like making my groups gray just so I
can see the difference and this will be
the vocals bus Group but we can even do
smaller groups inside like let's say we
want to take all of our doubles and
harmonies and process them together
group let's make it gray and this will
be called our Stacks there's autotune on
these individual channels but the rest
of these background vocals we're process
using the stacks Channel we can even
just minimize them from here on out and
look at them like this if we wanted to
but I'm going to keep it open let's see
what else we can group ad libs we'll do
all these individually background vocals
let's do these as a group and again the
only plugin that does need to be
individually is your autotune so we have
the ability to close down our entire
vocals let's do the same thing to our
beat hit command G let's just make this
group man that's a thick chunky group I
like that though we'll call this our
beat and now we have way easier control
points for gain staging for just muting
things if you want to just hear the beat
or just hear the vocals even if you
don't plan on group processing just
having things grouped is just way easier
on my brain for some reason now that we
do have things grouped and we are
speaking of gain staging I like to mix
into a master chain obviously we're
going to touch upon mastering at the end
but I like to have something that
resembles a finished Master ch chain
there from the start I like to load up
at least a limiter or if it's more of an
aggressive Dan Flor record a Clipper
going into a limiter and for this song I
have some settings that look like
[Music]
thisy and we're coming in a little bit
hot we could pull down the input gain
here or we could also do some gain
staging and pull our mix
down give that Clipper like three to
work
with put that back up at zero
[Music]
now we can push this up maybe one
more I like where this is hovering on
the
attenuation obviously attenuation
amounts can be kind of genre specific
but if it's any kind of genre that you
would hear a DJ playing you want to be a
little more aggressive with it than less
but like I said at the end of this
mixing tutorial we're going to revisit
our Master chain this is something
that's just going to be here so that
things don't completely change at the
end with all that being said let's
actually get into mixing these vocals a
lot of these things are just Preparatory
steps that lead up to you having an
effortless mixing experience we went
ahead and nailed everything so let's get
into our very first effect and that's
going to be some EQ now here on these
rap vocals we're going to do a slightly
different EQ than what we're going to do
on the singing vocals but we're going to
use the same plugin and I like using the
Fab filter Pro Q4 let's EQ these
vocals gigantic like the Atlantic alarm
but over understand when you hover your
mouse down here the meters freeze and
give you little reference points of
spots that might be spiking or louder
than the
[Music]
rest and while nothing particular ly
sounds harsh to me I generally find that
I get the best results dipping around
2.5k and you can grab right there and
then boosting around 1K with a way wider
Bell gig like the Atlantic the alarm but
Panic shoot it over their head they
never understand you don't run aad I'm
on another plan how dare you compare to
me how dare you let's also enhance our
brightness a little bit like we're
talking One DB boost
door easy at the back try a wider Q
using the scroll wheel on the
mouse now as I said earlier this mic was
recorded through a preamp that had a low
cut engaged and you can see that it was
low cuted around 80 HZ when it was
recorded that's where things really
start to fall off if you were plugging a
mic straight into an interface and you
didn't have that going in the analog
domain on the way in I would definitely
be hitting a low cut like this since I
did that in the analog domain I might
just do a low shelf instead and that
could give you the option to boost or
reduce your lows in a very
non-destructive nonlinear phasing way
cuz we're not doing any
filtering easy at
the headed like a Manor aive VAR is my
catalog classic built like analog real
wavy with the shars I'm the spark when
it's dark I'm the veins to the heart you
a Sitting Duck in my a and let's try
boosting around 100 just to bring the
real meat and tone out of the voice in
door easy at the
[Music]
back
15 and let's hear what we're doing
before and
[Music]
after front door easy at the back door
back door bullheaded like a metad door a
li VAR is my catalog classic built like
analog front door easy at the back door
back door boy headed like a matador a li
is my catalog classic built like analog
real wavy with the
shars I'm spark when
it's I'm the ve to the do a S duck in my
aim we're talking very subtle but also
makes a big difference especially over
the bead this is a great EQ curve to
start with like I said if your mic was
going straight in without a low cut on
your interface or preamp you might want
to add one of these to your EQ chain
that's a great starting point if your
vocal is feeling extra harsh in the
mid-range you could right click on your
mid-range Dot and hit make Dynamic and
bring down a little bit less dynamic
range in the mids and this will apply
some compression in this 2.5 region
front door easy at the back door back
door bullheaded like a met door a li is
my
catalog built like analog and likewise
if your vocal feels a little dull or
dark you could do the same here make
Dynamic on the top
end bring out the transience of the
[Music]
vocal or bring out the punchiness of it
front door easy at the back door back
door bullheaded like a m door
is my catalog yourt like
analy with
the
I'm duck my
aim another great EQ that I like to use
on vocals that's also included in the
Anthology bundle by even tide is split
EQ and what's cool about this EQ is it
divides your audio into transient and
tonal material and that's represented by
the green and blue controls that you see
for example let's say we wanted to boost
the transient information in the high
frequencies and turn it into a regular
Bell shape we want to take our tonal
information turn it down around 2.5k
with a narrow
bellig
atan and let's try boosting around 1K
with a wide belt
don't dare compare to
me for the low end let's try turning up
the tonal before you get it none of it's
magic door easy at the back door back
door bullheaded like a met a li is my
catalog classic pull to the base using
the white line to affect both transient
and tonal
together
[Music]
theck let's hear it before and after gig
like Atlantic alarm but shoot it over
their head they never understand you
don't run the road I'm on another plan
how dare you
me I'm inin like my energy you got to
imagine before you really get it none of
it's
magic front door easy at the back door
back door
buhe is my catalog classic built like
[Music]
analogy the spark when
it's the ve to the S duck my
aim definitely a useful plugin if you
want to look at your audio under a
microscope and really divide it and
finesse each the and really divide and
finesse your transient and tonal data
separately let's move on to compression
I like using our compressor on rap
vocals and our Vox on singing vocals
we're going to pull up the mono vst3
version and I like using this on rap
vocals because rap vocals tend to have
very fast cadences and finessing the
attack and release to perfectly match
your vocals is way more helpful let's
listen from the beginning of the verse
Jack
atantic pull our threshold down to
aboutus
[Music]
15 now if you want to bring attention to
the ends of the words turn down the
release and if you want to add more
transients to the beginning of the words
push up the
attack
analy with the shs like a ratio between
two and
[Music]
three this is where if your vocal feels
extra spiky and your waveforms aren't
very consistent you might want to pull
in a higher ratio you could even go up
to four if you were plugging a mic
straight into your interface and didn't
have that extra Dynamic control built
into the signal but since my vocals
already coming in a little bit
controlled I'm not going to do too much
with the r compressor I don't want it to
be
noticeable the veins to the you a
Sitting Duck my aim in how dare you
compare to me how dare you I'm infinite
like my energy you got to imagine before
you really get it none of it's
magic front door easy at the back door
back door bullheaded like a metad
[Music]
a and those are some really nice
settings for rap vocals next let's move
into dsing my go-to dser plugin for male
or female vocals for a good long time
now has been Fab filter Pro DS I really
like the default preset but I feel like
sometimes it does a little bit too much
[Music]
theought let's turn the range down so it
can't attack as
[Music]
hard you're limiting how far down the
attenuation can go with the
range stre just actor you do it for the
just about five sounds natural to me
H with the G on
island like sty let's turn the whole
vocal chain on and
off bought a profit my game birds always
sing in the same song I don't want to
talk even get along watch mey and try to
cop stop
me the with
the High Street these already sounding
super clean the dry vocal aesthetic
works really well for this style of rap
when there's a high density of lyrics
and words are flying by fast like that
there's not a lot of space to fill with
effects and the dry I call it an
aesthetic even though it's a sound but
the dry aesthetic is a really good
choice so we're not going to be too
heavy-handed with the effects on the rap
lyrics the effects are really going to
happen elsewhere but that being said
there is one effect that works really
well with dry stuff because it's not a
Time based effect it's more of a
pitch-based effect and that is little
alter boy I want to dial in that deep
octave down voice that you get here and
we're not going to have it obviously on
the whole vocal just a few words gig
atantic
but understand don't on
another how dare you compare to me I
like how dare you compare to me let's do
our first little bit of automation cuz
this is the last knob I've adjusted when
I hit the letter A it's going to
automatically bring me to the automation
line for the knob I'm adjusting so let's
highlight the word that we want some mix
knob on and just pull it up and
everywhere else is 0% and maybe instead
of a hard up and down we'll do like more
of a slope up and
down how dare you comp how dare I'm like
my energy you got to imagine before you
really get it the last dry effect I'm
going to add that glues and squeezes
everything together and gives that final
bit of aggression to the vocal is some
parallel compression and to do that I'm
going to use the CLA 76 plugin from
waves and to dial this in for parallel
compression I like to turn the mix knob
way down and then turn the input gain
way up and we could turn the output gain
down so it doesn't come in super loud I
like the brighter Bluey preset and for
parallel compression definitely the all
and let's speed up the attack and speed
up the
release gig atantic alarm this is 0%
let's dial it in from
zero door easy at the back
door like
a turn up the output
[Music]
we're just use like 10% of this or
less the duck my aim so even though
these are extremely extreme compression
settings at 10% on the mix knob it's
just slightly there in the background
giving you that in-your-face vocal the
entire time while letting the vocals
stay as dynamic as possible in the
background front door easy at the back
door back door bullheaded like a you can
even drop it back to like
[Music]
5% with the shars I'm the spark when
it's I'm the veins to the heart you a
Sitting Duck in my aim and
shot so that's going to be the chain for
our rap vocals like I said I want these
to be really dry because the singing is
going to get all the effects and provide
all the contrast and also the ad libs
are going to get a lot of effects and
contrast too so let's copy and P paste
this chain we can get rid of little
alter boy because that happens earlier
out here and let's edit this EQ to work
better with our doubles I'm going to
turn off make Dynamic on these two and
I'll keep make Dynamic on the
[Music]
mid-range a is my catalog classic built
like analog real wavy with the shars I'm
the spark when it's dark I'm the veins
to the heart you a Sitting Duck in my
aim and Shar
and for the doubles I'm basically
pulling down the spots that I pulled up
in the lead to make them sit more nicely
together it's like carving out a pocket
for one another front door easy at the
back door back bullheaded like a a is my
[Music]
catalog I'm also going to delete
parallel compression that's something
you only need on the leads the veins to
the heart do a Sitting Duck in my aim
and stop yeah everybody want a baby but
as far as the compression and dsing
settings go we'll keep those the same
between the leads and doubles so we've
got this simple dry doubles chain a
slightly more complex lead vocals chain
let's paste this down onto our adlibs
and customize everything to make our
adlibs sound as good as possible first I
like having that signature telephone
effect I'm always going to be low
cutting them pretty aggressively usually
above 300
htz and maybe a high cut too want be
[Music]
because when the main lead comes in you
want that to feel the brightest so a
little high cut on the ad lips is nice
[Music]
too gigantic like the Atlantic sound the
alarm but don't panic it over head never
understand do like 300
another dare comp dare I'm like my you
got to we magine before you really get
it none of it's magic
front door easy at the back door back
door bullheaded like a metad door a
liary is my
catalog and since adlibs tend to be way
more Dynamic I tend to hit the ratio a
little harder on the adlib
[Music]
compression yourself not
and now the rest of the adlib sauce is
really through reverbs and delays and my
favorite brand for reverbs has always
been even tied as far as short reverbs
go I've been using the SP 2016 a lot so
let's drop this and create our first wet
Reverb effects and when it comes to
effects I love using audio effects racks
here in Ableton so I'm going to press
command G right click and create a chain
command R to Ren name it dry this is
where our dry signal stays and then
below is where our plugins go here in
our SP 2016 want to make sure that our
wet dry mix is at 100% let's hear these
ad
[Music]
lips you want
be them with a little pre- delay like 50
milliseconds turn up the Decay
[Music]
length gigantic like the Atlantic and
we'll turn the position back too shoot
it over their head never understand I
like this Reverb because it gives you
front to rear panning which is super
Next
Level and then once you like the way
your Reverb sounds you adjust the level
of your Reverb here in the audio effect
rack and your dry signal always stays
the same up in your face keeping your ad
libs nice and clear and your effects
controlled in the
[Music]
background gigantic like the Atlant
sound the alarm but don't panic shoot it
over head they never understand you
don't run on another plan how dare you
comp dare I'm like my energy you got to
wear magic before you really get it none
of it's magic next plug I'm going to
drop in here is the Ableton Echo I don't
know something about it just looks right
and feels right and I like how you don't
have to open the user interface to see
the user interface here in Ableton which
is a huge Advantage I'm GNA do a quarter
note Echo and see how that goes let's
also add some sauce to these Echoes with
the Reverb and a little bit of a filter
just like we're doing but we're going to
filter it more on the delay let's turn
on our input drive and take a
listen gigantic like the Atlantic sound
the alarm but don't panic shoot it over
their head they never understand you
don't run the world I'm on another plan
how dare you
compe I'm infinite like my energy you
got to wear Magic before you really get
it none of it's
magic front door easy at the back door
let's try ping
[Music]
pong anal I like the ping pong I
actually like hearing the adlibs come
from one side or the other so instead of
leaving this absolutely dry I'm going to
drop an auto pan here on the dry channel
so that way we get a little bit of left
to right movement on the dry version and
then a lot more left to right movement
on the wet Echo hear me out none
[Music]
ofy a Mador a li is my catalog classic
built like analog real wavy with the
shars and also to avoid adlibs from
clashing on top of other adlibs let's
just enable ducking and let's also
enable some wobble too just to give them
some modulation and get them a little
funky sounding cuz when when it's
singing wobble is a no-o but when it's
rap ADL wobbles usually pretty
fire 1
repeat
[Music]
everybody and we've got some clean ad Li
chains double chains and lead vocals
here on a rrap we have one little
special effect vocal
here 2 1 and I use these actually from
the easy McCoy vocal sample pack which
is available at hoops.com and I'll put a
link to that in the description below if
you need some rap vocal samples because
easy has dropped the most fire party
vocal sample pack and Anthem vocal
sample pack of royalty-free phrases
Loops Hooks and one shot and useful
little tidbits that you could use as
transitions like this 3 two one so I
went pitch these little Clips down and
chop them up but I want to do a little
bit more I wanted to kind of feel like a
robot is counting down just to make it
feel a little fancier I'm can to use
this plugin called bitp and this is kind
of an OG voice manipulating plug-in that
not a lot of people know about 3 2 one
I'm just going to automate the pitch
knob here so let's start at zero and
let's end at minus 12 and see how we
could get it 3 2 1 oh 3
2 that's fire the rest of the knobs
we're just going to leave in the default
position but I wanted to do kind of like
a record stop effect on the word one and
the easiest plugin to dial that in here
in Ableton is effect tricks and here in
effect tricks we're just going to go to
the vinyl and I want it to be on bat 4
so I think we're just going to draw a
block from here it's like a step
sequencer
three and then that just goes a little
fast so let's go and maybe we'll just
start it
here woo one more time three two one
boom so we just took that vocal sample
from this 3 2 1 which is cool but now
it's this 3 2 1 let's
[Music]
go they
me keep watching watch
itat yeah everybody want a baby they can
try but they never going to Su follow me
like one 2 three keep watching watching
on me
now after hearing these ad libs all sa
up with Echoes there might be a few
spots in the lead that I might want to
Sauce up with a delay let's take a
listen there you compare to me like that
I feel like we might be able to do
something cool with let's try an eighth
note Echo just in that spot again I'm
always thinking of Echoes as more
momentary Echoes when it comes to mixing
rap vocals this is like a lyric has an
echo I just want the word me to Echo and
a really easy way to isolate the the
input of a delay is by throwing a
utility before it and the reason I do
utility is because the input gain goes
all the way down to negative Infinity
whereas this input gain only goes to
minus 40 and I need it all the way down
uh so let's go all the way down and then
halfway up for the lyric that we want to
trigger the Echo and it's going to be
the last word of this compare to me me
let's start from here and end it like
here compar to me
there we go now we got an echo just on
that word so that's how we mix rap
vocals from leads doubles to adlibs and
special effects let's jump into the
singing vocals and do the same as we
mentioned earlier they already have uad
and tar autotune on them you could use
any autotune variation you like or even
Ableton stock auto shift there's a bunch
of different copycats that you could get
for a way more affordable price but I've
been using this one forever so I
continue to use it for the rest of this
chain it's going to be kind of similar
to
the rap vocals but we're going to dial
in slightly different settings so let's
go back and start with some EQ so I'm
going to do our Fab filter Pro Q4 again
and let's take a listen to our
[Music]
hook keep watching watch it I'll repeat
everybody want a baby they can try but
they never going to suce they
can try pulling this down making it a
little bit wider just drop about one DB
[Music]
there sometimes to find The Sweet Spot
that I want to boost I go way too much
and see where it sounds kind of pleasing
and then just do a soft subtle amount of
that so we landed around 7.5 on this
[Music]
vocal now let's hit that low shelf that
we were doing earlier that kind of
sweeps across all the low
[Music]
frequencies it's almost like we're doing
a broad tilt EQ where we're reducing the
low frequencies increasing the high
frequencies but not actually filtering
anything we did that on the preamp on
the way in but again if your mic was
just going straight into an interface on
these female vocals I'd probably be low
cutting them at at least
[Music]
just bring a little bit of the warmth
out or let's even make Dynamic and let's
have it just push up like
[Music]
this they follow me
like keep watching watching me everybody
want let's do the same over here they
can but they never going to they me
like keep
watching let's hear it without any
[Music]
plugins
watching
everybody
[Music]
but so like I said vocal EQ does not
need to be transformative it does not
need to be surgical it does not need to
be corrective it can just be slight
enhancements and flavor small 1db
reductions and boosts should be all
you're aiming to do so this is a great
lead vocal EQ let's get into our lead
vocal compression for the singing like I
said I like using arox on singing and
we're going to go for the mono version
here on this monov voal and let's pull
down our gain and compression at the
same time by drawing that little secret
box
[Music]
but push this up a little
bit hey I love rvox with how simple it
is and that invisible box trick just
makes it even simpler to use next we're
going to pull up my favorite dser again
the Fab filter Pro
DS everybody wanna be me they can try
[Music]
but and finally some effects so let's
pull up a Reverb that helps put this
singing vocal into the same kind of
space as the lead vocal I'm actually
going to copy this whole effect rack
because I need to borrow those delays
too so let's pop a Reverb that helps
this go into the space as the adlibs
from the rap vocal we're going to use
the SP 2016 again create a dry chain
let's pull our Reverb down like minus 10
as a starting
[Music]
point it watch it repeat yeah everybody
to be me they can try but they're never
going to
suce one thing I like to do on lead
vocal reverbs for singing is add some
extra dsing before the Reverb now this
isn't dsing that affects the dry signal
this is dsing that affects what's
triggering the Reverb so I'm just going
to throw the waves DS could be
anybody and we're going to do some
aggressive dsing and this kind of
darkens the SP 2016 Reverb in a really
nice way I find that with Reverb plugins
the unpleasant part is the Reverb on the
S's and T's so if you can kind of duck
that stuff going into into the Reverb
plugin you'll just have a way smoother
Reverb experience with any
revers they but
suce 100
mbody but never going suceed they going
follow
me watch watch it repe that's a nice
smooth Reverb now for delay on this
vocal we can pull up Echo again and dial
in something custom I want a really
short feedback because there's really no
gaps to fill with lots of Echoes and I
also think I want an eighth note delay
too
just they can try but they're never
going to succeed they going to follow me
like one two three keep watch it watch
it I repeat yeah everybody to be Drive
never going suceed they going follow me
like one two three
everybody but never suce
meere and this Echo is going to be a
static Echo that just stays there the
whole time I might do one kind of delay
throw of a quarter note on the very last
word let's put a utility before it to
automate let's automate
repeat around the world like iPhone
[Music]
the only other effect I might borrow
from the rap vocal chain is this
parallel compression just because the
beat and production is so bumping during
this it probably needs that extra little
bit of compression to cut through but
now that we have our whole chain here
let's see our lead vocals mixed before
and
after
[Music]
goinging they but never
going and mix
watch this is what a standard lead vocal
chain would look like in my Ableton
sessions for singing and for rapping
they're not terribly different but they
serve slightly different purposes and
they're automated at slightly different
times to help tell the story let's move
into the doubles and harmonies for our
singing instead of processing all six of
these channels earlier in the tutorial
we grouped these into a group called
Stacks so now we can load off some
stereo plugins on this group called
Stacks let's do rvox again
up here we use mono down here we use
stereo cuz we already have pre panned
vocals now going into this
plugin and you can see we have stereo
[Music]
compression and then we'll throw another
Fab filter Pro Q4 at the beginning of
the
chain let's make these really bright
watch it
on yeah everybody want a baby they can
try but they never going to suceed they
follow me like pull down the low
frequencies
[Music]
without pops a lot more with that extra
DB around 12K
sometimes you can go bright on the
doubles sometimes you got to go dark
this feels like a bright song to me
let's keep the s's under controls with
another Fab filter Pro DS I think you
guys are starting to recognize the
pattern here of how I like to
mix going to suce they follow me
like keep watching watch it I'll repat
yeah everybody want a baby they can try
but they never going to succeed they can
follow me like one in three keep
watching
and we have a convenient control Point
here if we want to turn down all of our
Stacks now that we've mixed them maybe
they're feeling a little loud and
overpowering our
lead and we're not going to do parallel
compression on these so just a simple EQ
compressor dser is a perfect starting
point but obviously these need a little
bit of that sauce so I'm going to start
instead of with a Reverb plugin I'm
going to start with A Chorus plugin a
classic that's known for really
multiplying the voice and making it seem
like there's more singers in the group
than there actually are I'm going to use
the even tide h3000 Factory Mark I I'm
going to throw this in a Parallel Group
just like everything else let's create a
chain then I'm going to go into the
presets menu and load up the h3000
Legacy preset called dual
h910 this is going to kind of provide a
chorus effect using pit shifted
[Music]
delays and we'll just duck it in the
volume
let's hear in the
mix they but they never
[Music]
goinging yeah everybody want a baby they
can try but they never going to sued
they can follow me like one
and even TI
[Music]
h3000 now that plugin is definitely a
party moving on let's add some Reverb to
this chorus effect we want it to have a
similar space to the leads and the rap
vocals so let's throw up another sp26
Reverb on here and we're going to keep
the Reverb time nice and tight the K
time around 2
[Music]
seconds watching
watch everybody to be me they can try
but they never going to suce they turn
thec down a little bit
more we're purposely going to keep the
pre- delay as low as possible on this
Reverb
yeah everybody want a baby they can try
but they're never going to succeed they
can follow me like one two three keep
watching
watching we're not making huge
adjustments we're doing small subtle
effects that add to the overall impact
and help it serve its purpose in the
group and we're going to keep all of our
reverbs and delays pretty tight and
short because this vocal Cadence has a
really high density of lyrics but there
is a spot over here where we get to get
a little bit more freaky with the vocals
it's okay just watch watch and press
play watch and press
play Let's un solo our
[Music]
vocals now that's completely dry it just
has the autotune on there let's copy all
of our lead vocal chain dry stuff on
here and let's start a whole new rack
now and the first plugin I want in this
rack is going to be the black hole
Reverb now this is the Reverb that you
want to send your vocal to outer space
with and let's open black
hole oo I already know this is going to
get
crazy it's okay just watch and press
play watch and press
play okay now this might be a little bit
too long to have on all the time so I
might make a medium length Reverb with
that SP 2016 by going like this push it
back and also push up let's go to like 7
seconds so you got like a long Reverb
and a medium Reverb
now so let's control when we hear our
long Reverb I'm going to throw utility
before it pull it all the way down and
show
automation let's zoom in on our vocal
and I know that I want to fill this Gap
with reverbs so let's start our
automation like here
we'll come up like
[Music]
this and then SP 2016 right
here and then black hole for this last
lyric and that's a crazy Bridge let's
hear that from the top
watch it on me it's okay just watch and
press play watch and press
play nice
beaz just watching Press Play watching
Press Play and
get it's okay just watch and press play
watch andess
play and of course you got to throw some
delays and echoes in here
[Music]
too
hey
watch watch and
play
be just watch and press play watch and
press she got extra sauce on those last
[Music]
lyrics shout out to Black Hole by even
time press
playing yeah everybody want to be me I
can try but they never going to succeed
they going follow me like 1 2 3 keep
watching watching all so now we're down
to these vocal ad lips that Cara did we
can copy a similar adlip chain that we
did on the rap vocals cuz she's not
doing a terribly different
thing the to start a fight and a
cop maybe we'll just low cut Paris ad
libs a little
[Music]
more and cut Marathon run my
Race 2 1 everybody want a
baby never
[Music]
going now I think these singing ad lips
deserve a little bit of echo so that
they get recognized more let's just
boost whatever Echo we have here and
we'll just hit the input gain
[Music]
harder keep watching watch
it yeah everybody want a baby
but never going
[Music]
to and now I don't want these to Echo
out over the last lyric When the Beat
stops so I'm going to show automation
here on the mute
button and mute these Echoes right here
for the rest of the
[Music]
song hey finally the last element that
we have here in these singing vocals are
some background during our final
chorus now background vocals are
intended to be completely separate from
the rest of the mix so let's mix these
in a way that kind of helps them stand
out
[Music]
completely I'm going to borrow some of
the effects here from the doubles let's
just grab the whole chain and we'll take
the dser out so let's put this up here I
want to add a little bit more grit and
grime to these background vocals just to
really help them Stand Out by themselves
so I'm going to pull up the even tide
Crush station this is a fun plugin
because it combines a whole bunch of
different distortions into one so you
can kind of pick your favorite let's try
the low octave
down that's tight maybe I'll put this as
a
parallel let's turn the grid
up let's turn the drive up
[Music]
too and let's have the EQ at the end of
this chain so you can kind of control
the tonality of everything it gets a
little bit Bassy at the end there so
pull it down like
this make these a little
thinner that's
clean let's pull the level
[Music]
down and let's just turn Crush station
way down in the mix when I'm dialing in
the effects I have it really loud and
then when I'm actually blending it in
that's when I pull it back
but they never going
[Music]
to so there you have a complete vocal
mix with dry EQ compression and effects
all the way to reverbs delays choruses
and special ear candy and tricks that
help things transition and move along
the only channel that we have left is
here below all of our vocals and
instrumental channels and that's the
master at the very beginning we started
with a Clipper and a limiter as our
master chain let's dial in some final
settings here and also check our final
loudness using a metering
[Music]
plugin let's turn our
clipping get more saturation in the
overall
[Music]
mix saturation is like the loudness key
because it doesn't make the song
loudness on the meter it just makes it
feel
louder and when you're using a Clipper
going into a limiter it's important to
keep the ceiling off on your Clipper
because the final ceiling is going to be
determined by your limiter let's play
our hook one last time and check out the
levels of our gain attack release and
transient linking these are the main
four controls that I usually adjust
aside from changing the
style everybody want to be me they can
try but they're never going to succeed
they going follow me like one 2 three
[Music]
the master sounds way more open when you
slow down the
attack but you are introducing more
harmonic saturation through the
[Music]
limit slowing down the release of your
limiter kind of masks how squashed it
may be sometimes for your genre of music
plus 5 DB of gain and this much
attenuation that we were getting here
during the chorus is what you want and
release kind of helps mask that a little
bit whereas here it sounds a little more
limited I like to keep this in the
middle though a little bit more to the
right but towards the middle now let's
do one more listen for transient
[Music]
linking everybody want to be me they can
try but they're never going to succeed
they going follow me like one 2 three
they keep watching watching
all everybody want a baby they can try
but they're never going tox me they
follow me
like when the transient link is all the
way up I hear the drums take more
precedence over the vocals and as I pull
it down the vocals breathe a little bit
more naturally in Dynamic feeling I
think somewhere around 50 or 60% is
going to be where I want to land on this
song now we could just look at our final
lufs levels here in Fab filter but
there's a plugin that I like using way
more for this kind of stuff and it's
called Insight by isotope we'll grab
insight to I know this is pretty CPU
heavy but we're just going to turn on
all these at once don't worry these new
Mac Mini M4 Pro chips can handle it no
problem honestly it can handle this
whole session no problem cuz nothing in
this entire Ableton project is frozen or
anything and we're not even approaching
the maximum CPU level even with 4X over
sampling super impressive but back to
our loudness
sex they going follow me like 1 2 3 keep
watching
watching Everybody want a
baby and always like looking at the
short-term lufs during the loudest part
of the song and hovering around - 7 orus
8 is exactly where I'm trying to
land here on the Spectrum analyzer you
could tell that we got a pretty even
representation of all the frequencies
nothing is standing out as overly
spiky everybody be but
going and we got some really nice wi
coming from the
vocals me
like watching watch
itat everybody want a baby and our
spectrogram shows us dynamic range
[Music]
all those little Hills and Valleys
represent the dynamic range of our song
even though we're getting some pretty
aggressive loudness levels from our
Clipper and limiter we're not completely
obliterating the dynamic range we're
just getting as much loudness as
possible out of the mix so our demo
Master chain ended up being pretty much
our final Master chain with a few slight
adjustments and with that we're ready to
take a listen to our finished results so
let's rewind the song and turn up our
speakers and hear the mixed vocals in
repeat by E McCoy featuring Cara
yourself
not gantic like the Atlantic sound the
alarm but don't panic shoot it over
their head they never understand you
don't run the r them on another plan how
dare you
competi I'm inin like my energy you got
to imagine before you really get it none
of it's magic repetition front door easy
at the back door bullheaded like a
a li is my catalog classic built like
analog real wavy with the shars I'm the
spark when it's dark I'm the ve to the
heart you a Sitting Duck in my aim and
shot yeah everybody want a baby they can
try but they never going to they
me keep watching watching
IAT everybody want a baby they can try
but they're never going to Su they can
follow me like one
keep watching
watching know around the world like a
iPhone I bought a profit my game strong
you Birds always singing the same song I
don't want to talk or even get along
watch me envy and try to Copy Stop me
ran over at top speed get to the ched
with the rock i l a highway not side
street you just a actor you do it for
the props the type to start a fight and
call the cops hobby with the gang on the
island is dress myself like a stylist
she got the Boom in the Bas the way she
move her wa got me oo at the face I'm a
dog so you know I love it Chase game
like a Marathon run my
Race
everybody they cany but they never going
to they me
like keep watching watch
it everybody want a baby they can try
but they're never going to suceed they
can follow me like one
keep watching watch it it's okay just
watch and press play watch and press
play
[Music]
on be amaz just watching Press Play
watch and press
play yeah everybody want to be try but
they're never going to succeed they
going follow me like 1 2 three keep
watching watch it all
everybody
baby let's s these
vocals sounds
[Music]
clean so there you have my updated vocal
mix using Ableton and my favorite
thirdparty plugins and stock plugins and
special effects from the even tide
Anthology bundle special thanks to
Eventide for sponsoring this video and
if you want to check out their plugins
or any of the other vsts or effects that
you saw in this tutorial I'll include
links to everything in the description
below and catch you next time in another
video